---
layout: website
title: Intermedia
menu-active: intermedia
permalink: /about-intermedia/
---


<main class="page-content">

<div class="wrapper sidebar-contents">
  <aside class="sidebar-contents__table">
    {% include menu-intermedia.html %}
  </aside>
  <section class="sidebar-contents__section">

  <div class="text-container">
    <h2 id="intermedia-intro">Intermedia</h2>
    <h3>À propos</h3>

<p>Intermedia works draw their expression from relationships between media. Typically, they combine two or more media layers. The layers may include: spoken or sung text, acting, visual staging, costume, movement, dance and music. Diverse and powerful examples of intermedia can be found across epochs and cultures: Wayang Kulit, Kunqu, Wagner’s operas, Fluxus Happenings, MTV or Bollywood, to name a few.  Noh is one of the oldest and most elaborate among them. It was conceived as multilayered intermedia art form at its inception six centuries ago. Mainly transmitted orally ever since it has evolved but it has also retained most of its workings making it one of the oldest preserved and continuously performed forms of intermedia in the world. Not only it brings together multiple layers, each of which has been highly refined and plays a substantial role, but the correspondences between them are singular, intricate and wide-ranging. We believe that its essence and power is in a fascinating and unique intermedia language of expression that our project attempts to elucidate.</p>

<p>This section of the website is devoted to the general characteristics of Noh as intermedia. It presents intermedia relationships seen in entire plays and repertoire overall. In-depth analysis focusing on intermedia in specific plays, acts, <em>dan</em> and <em>shōdan</em> are presented in other parts of the website. To support the discovery of intermedia in Noh in a bottom-up view, we offer also under <a href="/elements/" target="_blank">Elements of Noh</a> introductions to individual layers and their building blocks. </p>

<p>
To fully appreciate intermedia workings of Noh it is very helpful to understand its form. Noh’s structure consists of sections (<em>dan</em>) that represent common events of the dramatic development, which in turn are composed of modules (<em>shōdan</em>) of different but standardized function as well. Various forms of poetry, movement, rhythm, melodic shape and instrumentation help articulate these structures. With the <a href="/form/" target="_blank">form of Noh</a> being highly codified, an informed viewer can follow how intermedia articulate these structures, even when listening to a play for the first time. To help our readers orient themselves further and build useful intermedia expectations, we have developed visual representations of each play’s structure using an <a href="/form/#ITI" target="_blank">Intermedia Texture Index</a> (ITI).  Its formula integrates information from multiple media layers into a <a href="/hashitomi" target="_blank">single graph</a>.  To ground the viewers’ expectations in a more detailed way, the website offers also intermedia <a href="/hashitomi/ageuta-1/" target="_blank">‘scores’</a> for individual modules (<em>shōdan</em>). They provide notation for the intermedia layers of text, music, and dance. The viewers have the option of shaping their focus by activating in the scores all or any layers that they want to see.</p>
<p>
The style of performance is also intermedia in nature. Each of the layers is performed with inflections appropriate for a given play, role or circumstance. To bring into focus these styles and their expressive range we use side-by-side comparisons of video examples. One example is the <a href="/music/otsuzumi-kotsuzumi/#strictness" target="_blank">comparison of rhythmic settings</a> of percussion instruments. These can show even the very subtle differences between distinct modes of singing, dancing or musical accompaniment that are related to particular character or situation. In performing arts in general but in Noh in particular it is not just the “what” but very much the “how” that matters.</p>

<p>
Finally, the idea to present Noh as intermedia required a new kind of publication. We opted for an audiovisual interactive format for two main reasons. Firstly, we considered it imperative that to explain intermedia we must include intermedia examples as audiovisual documentation. On our website, the readers have access to an extensive set of video illustrations with elements of Noh as well as two full plays. </p>
<p>
Secondly, the interactivity or non-linearity of presentation gives the intermedia material a chance to be explored from multiple angles and with different depth that matches the needs of the reader and leaves more space for their own interpretation. For example, it is possible for a dance-focused reader to start with chapters about traditional <a href="about-movement" target="_blank">movement</a> elements in Noh or by customizing the score of a particular dance <em>shōdan</em> to feature information about its sequence <em>kata</em>. With this information they can then approach a larger intermedia context. We are aware that analysis of intermedia is extremely time consuming. Just to discuss the impact of music, one could address fluctuations in tempo, rhythmic organization, pitch motion and range, styles of delivery and more. Accounting for all expressive dimensions in all media and analyzing the complete network of intermedia relationships is prohibitively complex and perhaps impossible. Interactivity enables therefore exploration of Noh as intermedia in a more intuitive and personal way that fits the experience and interest of the readers. </p>


<h3 id="noh-as-intermedia">Noh as Intermedia</h3>
<p>How Noh is put together as intermedia is intricate, original and somewhat of a paradox. Despite significant independence of media layers, their individual sophistication and specialization, they cohere to a great expressive unity. Heterogenous materials that often function in loose synchronicity seem inseparable as intermedia and fit together like a glove. To help explain what is behind this artistic feat, several guiding principles can be identified. Not surprisingly, several can be traced back to the general context in which Noh came to being – the culture of the samurai, Japanese Buddhism and Chinese philosophy. But it is a great testament to the ingenuity of Noh artists that  while applying and engaging deeply with ideals of their time they created an art that is timeless.
</p>
<h4 id="breath">
The Breath of Yin and Yang
</h4>
<p>
Mostly metaphorically but also literally, ‘breath’ is one of the primary unifying elements of Noh. It is the central model for the form. The recurring cycle of inhaling/building-up energy and exhaling/releasing it, can be found underlying the flow of Noh on all structural levels. One could visualize Noh as a fractal design with ‘breath’ as its basic element. It repeats over and over in every possible time-scale and media layer to create an infinitely complex highly self-similar form. Conceptually, ‘breath’ can also be seen as reflecting the ancient Chinese philosophical tradition that describes the world as a constant balancing of Yin (dark, moon, female, inhale) and Yang (bright, sun, male, exhale). According to this philosophy, the two seemingly contrary forces are complementary, inseparable and depend on each other.
</p>
<p>
Breath is foundational for noh actors. In most literal way they develop a special kind of lower abdomen (<em>hara</em>) breathing that is similar to that of Japanese martial artists. They learn that precise control of breath is essential to convey appropriate expression of the chant as well as posture and movement of the body. It underlies the rhythm of <em>kata</em>. From the basic walking step to circling around the stage with a group of <em>kata</em>, they follow the energetic and spatial shape of a breath. </p>
<p markdown="1">

Mastering breath is crucial for the drummers as well. One kind of breath is very particular. The <em>komi</em> [^1] is a breath that is taken in silence without striking a drum but it is also the beginning of drumming patterns. It consists of a sharp rhythmic inhale and holding it deep in the abdomen for a while. After the build-up of internal energy through the <em>komi</em> a vocal call breaks the silence and leads to a release by a strike. The sequence of a <em>kakegoe</em> shout followed by a drum-hit is ubiquitous in Noh and can be viewed as an Yin and Yang pattern of its own. </p>


<p>
On a slightly higher formal level of the eight-beat unit <a href="/music/#Rhythm" target="_blank"> (<em>honji</em>)</a>, a common oscillation exists between the ōtsuzumi and kotsuzumi. Ōtsuzumi leads in the first half of the honji and is answered by the kotsuzumi in the second half. On the next level, when looking at the construction of a shōdan, there is often an alternation of sparse, rhythmically flexible <a href="/music/otsuzumi-kotsuzumi/#Mitsuji" target="_blank"><em>mitsuji</em></a> patterns with the more dense and decisive <a href="/music/otsuzumi-kotsuzumi/#Tsuzuke" target="_blank"><em>tsuzuke</em></a>. Following the same ‘breath’ model a typical short shōdan involves gradual acceleration of rhythm and a build-up that leads in the second half to a resolution, sometimes accompanied by an entrance of the nohkan, ending in a brief slowdown (like in <a href="/kokaji/sashi/" target="_blank"><em>sashi</em> of Kokaji)</a>.  Longer and more complex shōdan may consist of more than one ‘breath’. The principal sections of a <em>jonomai</em> dance called <em>dan</em>, hold within them a special moment of significant deceleration called <a href="/catalog-of-shodan/jonomai/#Oroshi" target="_blank"><em>oroshi</em></a>. Musicians talk about it as of a ‘stream reaching a pond.’ These slowdowns apply not just to music but also to dance, which at that time halt to a standstill.
</p>
<p>
The typical energetic trajectory of a large-scale dan (group of shōdan in an act) matches the same pattern: gradual extended acceleration and build-up followed by a fast closure with a short but palpable slow-down. Often, this maps also onto a pattern, in which the earlier parts of the dan use more prose recitation and <a href="/music/voices/#Non-congruent" target="_blank">non-congruent</a> chanting while the later ones involve more poetry and <a href="/music/voices/#Congruent" target="_blank">congruent</a> chant. Further, even each of the two acts creates its own gradual build-up that resolves with a fast movement that closes with a slowdown. The play as a whole also shows the same pattern with the second act raising the tempo and energy further beyond the first, reaching the most cohesive section and closing with an ‘exhale’.   </p>

<p>
The parallel changes of tempo bring about the issue of synchronization between performers. In most sections of Noh, there is no attempt between performers to adhere to a shared and regular pulse. The actors and musician meet at intervals marked by larger units akin of breathing cycles. On that level of time there can be a strong and sometimes very direct correlation of actions. The most important reference for the shite are the patterns of ōtsuzumi. To illustrate, at several points in the <em>Jonomai</em> the <em>uchi-hanashi</em> pattern of the ōtsuzumi serves as a signal to continue with the next sequence of movements. The pattern consists of a silent “tsu” on beat 8, “chon” on beat 1 and an extended kakegoe “yo” from beat 2 and half on. The interactions can be observed in the following three examples: <a id="jono1" href="#0" onclick="window.open('/popout/hashitomi/#t=01:05:05,01:05:27&autoplay&autoclose', 'new', 'width=640,height=360');return false;">in the <em>kakari</em> section</a>, at the point when the shite is facing front at Square 3, the pattern "tsu-chon" stops the dancer while the “yo” vocal call signals him to turn left and start to walk across the stage; <a id="jono2" href="#0" onclick="window.open('/popout/hashitomi/#t=01:10:29,01:10:50&autoplay&autoclose', 'new', 'width=640,height=360');return false;">in the first <em>dan</em></a>, similar stop and start occurs on Square 2 leading to walking across the stage; and <a id="jono3" href="#0" onclick="window.open('/popout/hashitomi/#t=01:13:51,01:14:08&autoplay&autoclose', 'new', 'width=640,height=360');return false;">in the second <em>dan</em></a> the dancer at Square 4 and synchronizes with <em>uchi-hanashi</em> pattern to stop and turn to the right to walk backward.
</p>
<p>
As to the synchronization with the nohkan, the actors are aware of its importance in underlining emotions in crucial moments, outlining form or embellishing the music but many do not know what melodic patterns and when would be played. Unlike the attention that they give to the strokes and <em>kakegoe</em> of the ōtsuzumi they do not need to follow specific notes of the nohkan. There is however an interesting parallel between the rhythmic flow of dance routines and that of non-congruent flute playing.  Both the nohkan phrases and sequences of kata are shaped as breaths and preceded by breaths. Even if not strictly synchronized, the intermittent action and resting creates a uniform energetic stream. The overlapping of nohkan patterns over adjacent dance routines creates a connection between them while retaining a highly desired fluidity.
</p>
<p markdown="1">

From the point of view of an actor, the Yin and Yang dichotomy is important in two ways. First, it helps guide them in creating a dramatically effective fluctuation in time. Second, it dictates that characters or situations that represent one aspect must also offer the other. This brings out depth and subtlety in their acting. A common instruction states: ‘in rain, be bright; during the day, be calm.’ As the actor Tastushige Udaka told us[^2], ‘you should imagine that you are dancing even if you are sitting still.’ Mastery of acting in Noh is not about literally portraying extreme emotions but about evoking them in powerful but subtle way. </p>



<h4 id="fluidity">

Fluidity of Time, Space and Identity
</h4>
<p>
Striving for a Yin and Yang equilibrium is also one of the causes that all in Noh is always fluid and gradual. The timing of events within individual layers as well as synchronization between them is in large parts intuitive and flexible. Regular and shared beats are reserved for certain important moments of intense focus and are arrived at smoothly, almost imperceptibly. The performers are interconnected, watch and listen to each other and maintain an intermedia flow but often without the need to synchronize strictly.
</p>
<p>
The drummers take the <em>komi</em> together but its duration is flexible and depends on the individual. The following beat is approximate and the kakegoe that precedes it is freely extended to match more general expressive needs. Many sections and layers of noh are in non-congruent and <a href="/music/otsuzumi-kotsuzumi/#strictness" target="_blank">flexible rhythmic setting</a>. Even when percussionist start coordinating pulse in a <a href="/music/otsuzumi-kotsuzumi/#strictness" target="_blank">strict rhythmic setting</a>  it does not mean that the chant or nohkan will join it. The <a href="/hashitomi/jonomai/" target="_blank"><em>jonomai</em></a> or <a href="/kokaji/maibataraki/" target="_blank"><em>maibataraki</em></a> dances that see all instruments rhythmically aligning are rare and serve as a climax. But even there, the dance is only loosely synchronized with the musical beat. When the musicians reach the <em>oroshi</em> the dancer will end up stopping entirely but there is no strict beat when that needs to happen. This is because the flow of energy that underlies the movement of bodies on stage is equally fluid. Even angular or sudden gestures result from an internal control that is continuous and 'smooth'.
</p>
<p>
The fluidity of the aesthetic form is an ideal expression of the fluidity of content. The minimalism of staging or even lack of literal references to particular locations allows for the space to be malleable and constantly redefined. Like in Kokaji, a few hints in the text allows viewers’ imagination to adapt and turn the imperial palace into Munechika’s home, workshop or road to Inari Shrine.
</p>
<p>
Adding to the fluidity is the polyvocality of text and transfer of identity between shite, waki and jiutai. The main actor can speak as a narrator, share a description, quote a poem, enter into a dialog with other characters and deities, and communicate their inner thoughts. Moreover, their voice can be transferred too. An example of it is found at the beginning of Kokaji’s first <em>ageuta</em>. Typically, the first line of text of an <em>ageuta’s</em> is presented by the shite and then repeated. If the repetition is done by the jiutai it implies that it took over the communication of the thoughts of the main character.
</p>
<p>
Most Noh plays’ plots unfold around the identity of the shite. The audience is invited to discover who they are and empathize with them. According to Buddhist doctrine identity is an illusion and Noh is based on this premise. In mugen Noh plays, which are considered by many its artistic pinnacle, what we see could very well be a dream or illusion seen by the waki. The main character appears in the first act as a ghost hiding in the body of someone whom the waki could normally encounter in the dramatic present. By the end of first act we may learn the true identity of the original host of the spirit but when they return in the second act they remain a mere spirit (not the historic living person they once were). They are on the journey to enlightenment and like we can see in Hashitomi, they may not even know anymore whether they are a spirit of a woman or of a flower. The fluidity of expressive means discussed above, is a perfect reflection of this fluidity of identity.
</p>
<p>
Keeping in mind this instability of identity it is interesting to observe how it can be gradually constructed by intermedia. In Hashitomi, when the shite appears the first clue is visual. The actor wears a mask of a young elegant woman and a costume that depicts flowers along fences. The movement is graceful and slow. Since the waki has spoken of performing a mass for flowers it is equally possible that the main character is a spirit of a flower or a village woman. The text sung by the shite in Rongi gives the name Yūgao but because it is a common flower name the identity remains ambiguous. The name becomes a woman’s nickname as the play progresses. Associations with Genji’s lover Lady Yūgao are made in the story told during the kyōgen and in the following shōdan. The dance that imitates her when Genji talks about Lady Yūgao establishes the most direct connection. It is through intermedia that the richness of the identity is created.
</p>
<h4 id="abstraction">
Engaging Abstraction
</h4>
<p>
Intermedia, by immersing all senses can help imitate reality but theatrical traditions differ in the level of realism of representation.  Noh is strongly on the abstract side of the spectrum. Its acting is highly formalized. The actors’ face is covered with a mask that prevents them from showing any direct emotion. Their movement and dance comes from a prescribed vocabulary of aestheticized kata, only some of which are even symbolically mimetic. Their speech is recited or chanted using standardized patterns that are shared between all plays without regard to their different stories. The ‘voice’ of the protagonist is frequently separated from their body, being transferred to the jiutai. The costumes match categories of characters by defining their gender, profession, and rank, with garments, colors and patterns that are strictly prescribed by tradition. The stage props are symbolic and often limited to just one placed centrally. The music is composed from a fixed collection of rhythmic and melodic patterns that are reused within and between different plays. The text is the only element that is original for each play but even there, the language is formal, quotations from poetry are prevalent and the plot itself is minimal.
</p>
<p>
The combination of all of these abstract intermedia elements is that it forces the audience to be more active, to project their thoughts and own their meaning. Similar to reading a book, when watching a Noh play one gets engrossed by artful narrative of ‘clues’ for one’s own act of imagining. The Noh mask epitomizes this projection. It allows one to piece together the ambiguity and richness of information from multiple dimensions into it. Because Noh is about contemplation of a character the best plays and performances make the viewers attain profound empathy with the protagonist. In such plays the climax of the experience is not some dramatic twist of a plot but the abstract dance with all of the musicians including the nohkan performing in rhythmic synchronicity.  When words cease, having done their part, we are left with the pure spirit, beautiful and vulnerable to our gaze. </p>
<h4 id="Kurai">
<em>Kurai</em>
</h4>

<p>
Noh actors and musicians often use the word <em>kurai</em>, which literally means ‘rank.’ The word was originally used to categorize plays according to main character’s social status, dignity, and age. A higher <em>kurai</em> demands more subtlety and solemnity in all aspects of performance. It uses the most refined quality of masks and costumes, the pitch of the chant and <em>kakegoe</em> of drummers is lower and expressively more grave, and the tempo of music and dance is slower. On the contrary, lower (lighter) <em>kurai</em> does not demand as much subtlety and solemnity. Hashitomi and Kokaji are  regarded as lighter in <em>kurai</em>. They feature young characters as protagonists; the plays are rather short; the dramatic themes are not particularly serious. Consequently, they have been included in introductory repertoire appropriate for young actors and musicians.</p>
<p>
Besides this usage, Noh actors and musicians use <em>kurai</em> to identify the expressive style of performance. In this case the word refers to the atmosphere created by protagonist’s character, emotions, and dramatic setting such as season and time of day. An actor or musician may say ‘Let’s perform this music and dance in Hashitomi’s <em>kurai</em>. Listening to this, other actors and musicians can immediately understand what is the proper tempo, timbre, gravity and atmosphere of the music and dance. They just need to imagine Hashitomi’s protagonist, a ghost of young lady (or a flower) who, in the evening of an autumn day somewhat happily tells a story of the encounter with a noble man, Genji. The intermedia nature of <em>kurai</em> and its primal importance is one of the main keys to understanding Noh as intermedia. </p>
<p>
Let's illustrate <em>kurai</em> with concrete examples. Act Two of Hashitomi includes a section named <em>Jonomai</em>, an instrumental dance without text or singing. The same dance is also performed in other plays such as Izutsu, Nonomiya and Eguchi featuring women that are older and with different life experience. The style of performance differs between them reflecting each protagonist’s age and circumstnaces. If their mind is filled with grief or sadness, musicians and actors must adjust the music and dance accordingly. </p>
<p>
Another example of <em>kurai</em> can also be found in the way musicians and dancers perform the same patterns in different contexts. The main section of the <a href="/hashitomi/jonomai/" target="_blank"><em>Jonomai</em></a>  dance is among others accompanied by the nohkan playing a fixed sequence of melodic patterns. The same patterns, however, are used in the <a href="/kokaji/maibataraki/" target="_blank"><em>Maibataraki</em></a> dance in the second act of Kokaji, which features as protagonist a lively god. Although both use the same melodies, the <em>kurai</em> of both is enitrely different. Also the choreography of the first section (<em>kakari</em>) of both dances is almost the same. The shite steps from square 1 to 3, turns left and goes to 5, then 5 to 1 and performs a ‘circlet point’. The sequence takes place from sentence 7 to 17 <a id="jono1" href="#0" onclick="window.open('/popout/hashitomi/#t=01:04:21,01:07:46&autoplay&autoclose', 'new', 'width=640,height=360');return false;">in <em>Jonomai</em></a>, and from sentence 3 to sentence 8 <a id="jono1" href="#0" onclick="window.open('/popout/kokaji/#t=00:53:29,00:53:51&autoplay&autoclose', 'new', 'width=640,height=360');return false;">in <em>Maibataraki</em></a>. As you may see, The two dances are different in tempo, size of steps and dynamics that appropriately evokes each protagonist’s character and their life circumstances.</p>
<p>
Recognizing the proper <em>kurai</em> helps the performers achieve a better level of synchronization (or sharing of the yin-yang breath) of music and dance. As we may find in the <a href="/form/#ITI2" target="_blank">ITI ranking list</a>, the ‘non-congruent’ rhythm, which does not follow the standard 8-beat frame, and flexible drumming, which does not clearly present 8-beat strokes, occupy a large part of Noh drama. Also, in the first stage of learning, each part is taught without any reference to the other parts. Dancers are taught only how to follow a fixed sequence of <em>kata</em> (prescribed movement) but not the music to which they will ultimately need to fit their dancing. Singers make it a rule to practice their singing without any reference to drum beats. The unique Noh pedagogy creates a path to “synchronization” or “congruency” on a higher level by introducing the <em>kurai</em> as something that connects all parts together. <em>Kurai</em> guides the process of combining media layers that would otherwise be "incongruent". The importance of the intermedia congruency is beautifully described by the actor, UDAKA Tatsushige when he stated: “If there is no nohkan playing in a <em>Kuse</em>, it is as if the peaks of the mountains were lost”.
</p>


<p>–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––</p>
<p>Noh is an intermedia art form of great expressive coherence. It breaths Yin and Yang as if in a fractal design. Through the fluidity of intermedia materials it embraces the impermanence of things and people. The abstract quality of its forms invites the audiences to engage deeply and become part of a rich and unique intermedia experience of Noh. </p>


  </div>
</section></div>
</main>

[^1]: For more precise explanation of *komi* see Fujita (2019a and 2019b) “Layers and elasticity in the rhythm of Noh songs: taking komi’ and its social background” in *Thought and play in musical rhythm*. Eds. Wolf, Blum and Hasty,  Oxford UP, 2019. <a href="https://scholarworks.iu.edu/journals/index.php/emt/article/view/28817" target="_blank">“The Community of Classical Japanese Music Transmission: The Preservation Imperative and the Production of Change in Nō.”</a>

[^2]: Private interview with UDAKA Tatsushige, October, 2018.
